# Technical briefs
This document is linked to from elsewhere, as I need to refer to "technical briefs" often. 

## What is a "Technical Brief"?
Technical briefs are what Microchip calls the sort of documents that most of the industry refers to as "app notes". They have published a great many of these. As Atmel, they were called Application Notes (which is the more standard term). In the case of some companies, you can make broad generalizations about the quality of their docs, or at least docs within a broad product group. 

With Microchip, the datasheets themselves are usually quite good. Their packaging of all the datasheet you need into a single file really does make working with Classic and Modern AVRs more pleasant than parts where there's one "datasheet" that tells you nothing about how to use any of the peripherals, and a gigantic tome somewhere to sift through to find the sections relevant to the part you have. Another (inferred) correlation in the Microchip datasheets and errata: Each die gets it's own datasheet and errata, whereas Atmel would group parts by featureset (so the tiny 84, 44, and 24 would share a datasheet); the fact that these were different dice of different revs didn't much matter - there was very little errata, as is typical when there is little innovation within the peripherals or overall chip design (as I
ve said, I think Atmel was lettign AVR become a backwater, which it no longer is). The early modern AVRs (particularly the 0/1-series tinies) were first released in one size - as always. Then they found scads of silicon bugs. Thee engineers scramble to fix these bugs for the next size, which is then released in better shape. More bugs still are fixed as they do the last 1 or 2 sizes. Thus, they now needed a different errata sheet for each size. 

## Are Microchip's any good?
They come in three varieties. 

* You see, "technical brief" is a very apt term - it covers the wide range of levels of documentation rigor, and this determines whether an individual Tech Brief is worth reading. Some of these are briefs as in a briefing, of the sort that would be given to a military commander when making strategic decision - filled with valuable insight and detail, and reports from the front lines. These sortsof technical briefs are of great value, though they may not be easy reading, they are the most useful class of technical briefs. I suspect that they were written primarily by an engineer, rather than a documentation person (though, since you can read it, it was *edited* by the documentation folks).

* Other "technical briefs" have less of the "technical" part, while focusing on "brief. That is, they're short short. This is not always bad - brevity is not a sin. But many tiems these briefs are far too brief. You find a document a few pages long purporting to cover a subject that would take 20 pages, easy. The "product brief" is the extreme of this (what Atmel called a "datasheet summary"); in modern AVRs, these go up to the I/O multiplexing section, and then skip to the boilerplate legalese. Atmel's datasheet summaries were even worse. But back to "brief" briefs. These give the impression of having been written by someone who is familiar with the peripheral, but has little experience actually *using it*, and these are generally not all that useful, though they may give a broad picture of how some aspect of the part is intended to be used, there are thorny problems that they neglect to cover fully or even acknowledge, and they make curious choices at times. 

* There are also an unfortunate third class of "technical briefs" that are even less helpful. Here the name is still apt: in the sense of the article of clothing of that name. These "briefs" serve much the same purpose as said clothing: they cover the ass ("Yeah, we totallly have an app not covering that right on our website!"), but that's about all. They tell you nothing that a person of below average intelligence couldn't tell you from the datasheet. This, I think, is what happens when *nobody who knows how the first think about how the feature actually works* can be made available to write the tech. brief, but customers aren't happy to see no additional documentation on it, so they cannot just not-write it. So someone who doesn't really know what the feature does or how to use it is forced to write a tutorial for it. That goes about as well as you'd expect, and usually just ends up paraphrasing the datasheet. Like a pair of briefs, while these might be a starting point, you'd better have more than that if you're hoping to go anywhere with it.

You cannot tell ahead of tiem what kind of brief you'll be getting (though "Getting started with" is a bad sign), but before the end of the first page, you'll know. 

## Are Atmel's any good? 
Atmel's are IMO generally better as app notes, except for the fact that they refer to aging parts that we should really start migrating away from... There are a few relevant ones for wierd people (like me) that talk about tricks in asm, but the general internet resources for that are better. Few of these are of value. 

## Where do I find them?
On the product page for the applicable parts (see the pages for the part series, and the links at the bottom of those., in no particular order. That means that the list will contain a mixture of not only those three classes of technical briefs, but also Atmel's old AVR App Notes. A few of the old app notes are useful and still relevant. The majority aren't though.

Pre-revolutionary and revolutionary documentation is shown for all AVRs, which is unfortunate. 

